# Lesson 11 - Make Your ULP App A Custom CMake Project

## What We'll Cover
- Creating a custom CMake project for the ULP application

To see all of the changes made and working simply run `git checkout lesson-11-end`. 

To follow along, run `git checkout lesson-11` and follow the instructions below.

## What Needs to Happen
Up to this point we have kept our ULP application code in a subfolder under our **main** 
application folder and used the ULP helper functions in the build system to build our ULP app.
As we've seen, this works fine and is probably all you need for most ULP apps. 
However, as your ULP code gets more complex you may want to have finer control over the compiler and 
linker options. To do so we have to do a few things:

1. Move the ULP code (optional but will help with organization)
1. Make the ULP app it's own custom CMake project
1. Tell IDF how to include our new custom ULP project
1. Refactor our main application code to use the new ULP project


## Moving the Code

Currently our ULP app resides in the **main/ulp** folder. Let's move our ULP code out to a dedicated 
**ulp** folder. 

Create a new folder in the root of the repository called **ulp** and move the existing **ulp** 
folder there. To be more descriptive, let's rename the subfolder to **temp_app**. Once you are finished 
you will have the following path from the root of your repo: **ulp/temp_app**. Under this folder will be 
**sensor.h**, **main.c**, and **sp.S**.

Curently, the building of our ULP app is handled by the changes we made in **main/CMakeLists.txt**. 
That's where the call to `ulp_embed_binary` happens. So we not only need to move our source 
code but we also need to set up a new ULP app-level **CMakeLists.txt**. This special file is 
how we instruct the build system to build our ULP application. Create that file as 
**ulp/temp_app/CMakeLists.txt** with the following content.

```cmake
cmake_minimum_required(VERSION 3.5)

# Project/target name is passed from the main project to allow IDF to have a dependency on this target
# as well as embed the binary into the main app
project(${ULP_APP_NAME})
add_executable(${ULP_APP_NAME} main.c sp.S)

# Import the ULP project helper functions
include(IDFULPProject)

# Apply default compile options
ulp_apply_default_options(${ULP_APP_NAME})

# Apply default sources provided by the IDF ULP component
ulp_apply_default_sources(${ULP_APP_NAME})

# Add targets for building the binary, as well as the linkerscript which exports ULP shared variables to the main app
ulp_add_build_binary_targets(${ULP_APP_NAME})

# Everything below this line is optional and can be used to customize the build process

# Create a custom library
# set(lib_path "${CMAKE_CURRENT_LIST_DIR}/lib")
# add_library(custom_lib STATIC "${lib_path}/lib_src.c")
# target_include_directories(custom_lib PUBLIC "${lib_path}/")

# # Link the library
# target_link_libraries(${ULP_APP_NAME} PRIVATE custom_lib)

# Set custom compile flags
target_compile_options(${ULP_APP_NAME} PRIVATE)
```

This is all boilerplate code with a helpful comment telling you everything below a certain line 
allows for customizing the build process. We'll revisit this in the next lesson. For now, just 
understand this is what tells the build system how to build the ULP application. 

## Tell IDF How to Include It

Since our ULP app knows how to build itself now we need to refactor how it's included in 
**main/CMakeLists.txt** so our main application can refer to it. It should look like this now:

```cmake
idf_component_register(SRCS "main.cpp"
                    INCLUDE_DIRS "${CMAKE_SOURCE_DIR}/ulp/temp_app"
                    REQUIRES soc ulp)

ulp_add_project("ulp_temp_app" "${CMAKE_SOURCE_DIR}/ulp/temp_app/")
```

Let's go over the changes we made. First, we removed all of the ULP boilerplate. Equivalents for all of 
that now reside in **ulp/temp_app/CMakeLists.txt**. All of it was replaced with a single call to
`ulp_add_project` since our ULP application is now its own CMake project. That function takes two 
arguments; the name and location of our project. The name can be anything you want. I chose 
"ulp_temp_app". Finally, we added the folder of our ULP app to the `INCLUDE_DIRS` directive so our 
main app knows where to find the header file **sensor.h**.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> The name you choose here will be used to name the ulp header file, binary reference and a few other 
> other things. We'll see this below.

## Refactor Main App to Use It

Let's try to build everything now.

```sh
idf.py fullclean
idf.py build
```

You should see an error like this:

```txt
/workspaces/ulp_playground/main/main.cpp:4:10: fatal error: ulp_main.h: No such file or directory
    4 | #include "ulp_main.h"
```

Recall that **ulp_main.h** was an automatically generated header that contains our shared variables. 
Now that our ULP app is it's own project with a new name ("ulp_temp_app"), a new autogenerated 
header exists. You can find all of this at **build/esp-idf/main/ulp_temp_app**. Our header file now matches the new name we gave our ULP project.

Go ahead and change the include line in **main.cpp**:

```cpp
#include "ulp_temp_app.h"
```

Try to build again. You'll get another error.

```txt
/workspaces/ulp_playground/main/main.cpp:7:10: fatal error: ulp/sensor.h: No such file or directory
    7 | #include "ulp/sensor.h"
```

Again, since our ULP app isn't a subfolder of our main application code we have to modify the 
`#include`. Since we added the folder of our ULP app to the `INCLUDE_DIRS` directive above, we can 
drop the **ulp** and include the sensor header as follows.

```cpp
#include "sensor.h"
```

Ok, we're getting closer. Time to build again. Soooo close. That time everything compiled fine but we 
get a failure on the linker step.

```txt
undefined reference to `_binary_ulp_main_bin_end'
undefined reference to `_binary_ulp_main_bin_start'
```

The linker is complaining because it can no longer find the start and end of our compiled ULP binary.
This makes sense because we renamed some things. Do you remember how to find the symbol name for the 
start and end of our ULP application? If you don't, I bet you know which Lesson I'm going to tell you 
it was in 😎. That's right, Lesson 4.

In our **build** folder we can look in **ulp_temp_app.bin.S**. We see the start and end of our ULP 
app are now referred to as `_binary_ulp_temp_app_bin_start` and `_binary_ulp_temp_app_bin_end`. We 
simply need to make this name change in **main.cpp**.

```cpp
extern const uint8_t ulp_main_bin_start[] asm("_binary_ulp_temp_app_bin_start");
extern const uint8_t ulp_main_bin_end[]   asm("_binary_ulp_temp_app_bin_end");
```

Now we can build, flash, and monitor and all output will be exactly as it was before. We have 
successfully refactored things to include our ULP app as it's own project. I would recommend doing 
this only in the following scenarios:

- You want to control a compiler flag for your ULP application
- You want to control a linker flag for your ULP application
- Your project contains multiple ULP applications and you want keep them separated
